They call him Amazon John.
More than three decades ago,
looking for hidden treasure along the Amazon,
Indiana Jones style,
John Easterling found treasures beyond the price
of gold and riches he was looking for.
The fruits, herbs, and roots of the rain forest.
He later founded Amazon Herb Company,
which leaders in the world of economics,
as well as consumers and indigenous tribes,
are heralding as a model of economic sustainability.
But what still gets Amazon John's passions going
after 300 plus trips to the Amazon,
are the constantly evolving possibilities
of how these nutrient-dense products of the rain forest
can change the quality of our lives.
(mystical music)
Let's talk about your personal story,
the voyage that took you treasure hunting to begin with.
And how you began first understanding
the beauty and value of these incredible plants
of the Amazon.
Because you had a tough story, you became ill.
Yeah I did and it really started before the plants.
I mean the story really began with an interest
in Peru and Bolivia and the highlands and the Inca cultures
when I was in grade school.
So it's kind of a dream deferred for many years.
And when I got done with college,
I sold my car and bought a ticket to Ecuador.
And that's how it all went down, really,
looking for lost cities of gold and Inca treasure.
So, essentially, I was a treasure hunter.
Indiana Jones.
That was it, you know,
I'd seen the stories.
I knew there was lost cities,
I knew there was gold down there.
And I didn't have any money, so I sold my car.
Gave me just enough money for a round trip ticket
with a couple hundred bucks left over.
So off I went.
And after being down a couple weeks,
I hadn't really found a whole lot of lost cities,
or any treasure or gold.
So I just bought some handicrafts and brought those back.
I was able to sell that to buy another ticket.
So I knew the system was gonna work after all. (chuckles)
So I continue going down, developing a trade
in artesanias items, and then later,
in a lot of gemstones out of Brazil.
And then started spending more time in the jungle
with tribal artifacts and blow guns and ceramics
and textiles and this sort of thing.
And so I developed relationships
with a variety of indigenous communities,
with Shipibo, and Ashaninka, Machiguenga Indians.
But you're right, I had a very serious health challenge.
In fact, I had a near death experience
in a hospital in North Carolina,
with hepatitus and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
when I was about 22 years old.
That left me in a very compromised state of health
where I fatigue very easily.
The mental acuity wasn't there.
You know, the liver performs like 900 different functions,
so there was just a real severe compromise
that I would get so tired, I'd just have to lay down
for a few hours and kind of break out
to get a little sweat going.
And then I'd be okay for another week or two.
So this happened in the jungle in Peru.
And some indigenous people brought me
a variety of herbs.
They just brewed up some tea,
Una De Gato, Chanca Piedra,
and brought it to me.
And I drank it.
Like I would drink pretty much
anything they handed me.
But I really had no expectations of anything happening.
But things did start happening.
After a few days I noticed that
I was feeling a little stronger, I was feeling better,
my mind was getting sharper.
And at the end of about a week, ten days,
I recognized that I feel as good as I felt
before I was sick.
Not even as good as I felt before I was sick.
I was feeling better and I took my health
to a whole new place.
Into what I call a new level of life experience.
Where the mental acuity is there,
the sense of groundedness, the energy flow,
you know, that natural vibration
and vitality that we have,
I felt at home in my immediate environment.
So I was really connecting with my surroundings
and the universe in a whole different way.
So I recognized then, gee, all these years
I've been coming down, chopping this stuff down
looking for treasure, that the real treasure,
in fact, is in over 200,000 species
growing in the Amazon.
So what happened from that point?
Once you made that discovery,
obviously it's been a journey,
and a long journey, to get where you are today.
What was your next step, once you realized,
"Aha! The gold is in the leaves, in the vines"?
Well yeah, it was very important to me
and I still didn't recognize it
as something to share with the rest of the world.
I recognized very valuable for me, you know,
I was maintaining a stash, if you will, of these herbs.
During this same time, I met a lady, Nicole Maxwell.
She had been introduced to me by a wildlife photographer
that spent a lot of time in South America.
And Nicole was a great pioneer.
She wrote a book early on,
called Witch Doctor's Apprentice in 1961.
And she spent a lot of time in Bolivia
as kind of a chain-smoking, gun-toting wild woman.
This is back in the fifties.
And she had an experience where
she was in the jungle doing a story,
and she was cut with a machete and bleeding heavily.
And some of the indigenous people around Iquitos
had saved her life with Sangre de Drago,
the sap from a tree.
They cut this tree, it bleeds the sap,
and put it in the wound and it healed,
and it saved her life.
And so, she got very interested in herbs and botanicals,
and spent the next 30 years of her life
studying herbs.
And I ran into her,
and she was sharing her story,
and I was sharing my story,
and that's when it really, kind of, clicked
that these things really are substantial treasure
the rest of the world can benefit from.
And so, I sold my company then,
The Raiders of the Lost Ark,
and we started Amazon Herb Company,
and just began to bring back botanicals
and formulate, and we worked
with a variety of doctors and practitioners
in the U.S. and Canada, and Spain
and Belgium, formulating product.
And that's interesting.
We'll get to that part a little bit later.
But, you really did make your original inroads
through the medical field.
Which, it seems as though
people have had such a fight.
There's been such a fight
between the naturalists and the medical field,
and trying to meld the two.
But you, actually, had an early track on that.
Yes, I was probably one of the early fighters on that.
(laughs)
It was a lot more of a fight back then,
but we had people that were interested.
And, obviously, you run into a lot of people
that were very interested in this.
Medical practitioners that were interested,
although the majority were not.
And I was very enthusiastic,
very passionate about this,
because I knew what a gift this was
to the rest of the world,
and my mind immediately went to,
well it should go to the practitioners,
because they're dealing with the patients.
They've got to know about this.
And so, we're taking it to them.
So there's a lot of "no"s, they weren't interested.
"Give us more evidence and more proof,"
so that was a fight.
And then, at the same time,
we would meet natural practitioners
that would really, just, readily absorb this,
and began to put it into play.
And we really began to see results there.
So, what I learned was that the fight,
there was no reason to--
time is your most precious resource.
So, if somebody's not interested,
that's fine, because other people are interested.
So you find the people that are interested,
and spend the time there.
Once I made that kind of realization,
I stopped spending so much time
trying to convince someone,
because many people were open
and understood the value of it.
So, since that time,
and that's been, what, 17, almost 18 years now,
there's a whole consciousness shift
in the population.
I mean, as a species, things are changing
very, very quickly now.
So, then, you had maybe
one out of 20 people that were
eating an herb, or a vitamin, or something like that.
And now that ratio's like one out of two.
50% of the population.
So, it's changed that fast,
in that short a period of time.
And so, it was during that period of time,
selling material only to practitioners and doctors,
the patients started calling and saying,
"gee, this stuff is really good.
"I would just like to get some."
And at that point in time, we were
exclusively selling to practitioners.
And then we opened up a model
to make it available to everyone,
so that's kind of the evolution of it.
Well, and the reason
this has become in demand,
because our products of the earth
that we see in the grocery store, supermarkets,
are denuded of almost any nutritional value in some cases,
and you're talking about a region of the world
that is so alive, has such great life force,
is so rich with nutrients
that the rest of the planet is truly starving for.
And you talk about five points
of irrefutable truths.
And, can we just go ahead and move through that list?
It's a short list, but it's a very important
and powerful list.
And the first is, our planet is oxygen deprived.
Yeah, the oxygen is so, so important.
I think everyone will agree with that.
That's what I call an undeniable truth.
Most people understand oxygen is important to life.
And the problem we're seeing right now,
with the climatic changes in the world,
where does oxygen originate?
Oxygen comes from plants.
People have to take that step, and say,
"where does the oxygen come from?
"It comes from plants.
"Plants are what's producing the oxygen
"giving us oxygen."
So they're taking in CO2, and giving us back oxygen.
Now, that's a good deal!
No matter how you think about it.
And we're losing about six football fields a minute
deforestation in the Amazon.
Six football fields a minute, 24 hours a day.
That's hard to even comprehend.
Yeah, this is a football field,
six football fields' worth of
oxygen-producing plants--
A minute.
So, we're seeing a decrease in
the concentration of the garden
of oxygen-producing area in the Amazon Basin,
so we're seeing a decrease
in the oxygen-producing capacity of our world.
Well, we're having an increase in population.
Well, we've got an increase in population.
Exactly.
Not good.
Well, it's not so good, you're exactly right.
And then, the other thing you referred to,
with the foods in the grocery store and things,
devoid of nutrition,
there's a couple of real strong points here
that we can look at.
Which comes to the second undeniable truth
of biodiversity in the Amazon.
Hundreds of thousands of species of plants,
hundreds of thousands of insects.
You've got tens of thousands of animals.
There's more fish in the Amazon River,
more species of fish, than in
all the world's oceans combined.
That's a pretty startling fact
that most people wouldn't recognize.
So this biodiversity is incredibly important.
It's a repository of minerals,
it's a repository of life force, of life energy,
as well as chemistry, nutrition, information
in these plants and in the rain forest,
like no place else in the world.
So these things that the indigenous people are eating,
and once you get upriver, like several days,
and you really got to get further and further now
to find communities that aren't affected by
processed bread, and sugars, and things like this.
But when you do get upriver
to those communities,
what you find is there aren't any degenerative disease.
The cancer, arthritis, diabetes,
these types of things just aren't there.
And that's a very striking difference
from where we live.
Most people are dying
of degenerative diseases here.
Cardiovascular disease is the number one killer,
followed by cancer.
So yeah, it's all degenerative disease is what's--
And followed very closely by prescription drugs.
Yeah, by prescription drugs.
Even according to the prescription.
Exactly.
So those are the biggest killers here,
they're not the biggest killers there.
What's the difference?
The difference is, of course,
the environment they're living in,
and the food supply.
You know, what they're taking in.
Because we all take in, and process our environment.
As air, food, sunshine, water goes in,
we convert that to living tissue and energy,
and then we eliminate the waste.
So we're just processing the environment.
What they're processing is of
a whole different density of chemistry,
nutrition, and information.
No degenerative disease.
Here, of course, most of the food
is commercially grown food.
So, the plants are growing in an area
that they may not normally have grown.
So, they're planted in this area.
They're growing in soil that's depleted
of the minerals because it's become exhausted,
and they're grown, not for nutrition,
they're grown to--
For bulk and beauty
Yeah, bulk and beauty, so--
And then you throw
radiation in, and genetically modified organisms,
and you really have a very unhealthy cocktail.
You've got an unhealthy cocktail
that manifests itself as--
Unhealthy people.
Cardiovascular, cancer, diabetes.
Now, that said, in the jungle,
it's not as though people have
a necessarily longer lifespan,
because you have snake bites, right?
You have other kinds of airborne,
mosquito borne types of diseases
that we know about.
A whole different thing, though.
These are quick, life-threatening, and it's done.
You don't just die, in essence,
from the moment you hit 20,
you don't start degenerating.
Yeah, you're right.
There's certainly challenges there.
And, certainly, there's, like you say,
parasitic related issues is a big problem there.
Malaria, Dengue Fever, Yellow Fever,
mosquito borne issues are a problem.
Snake bite, in many cases, some communities,
it's the largest killer.
It's the biggest cause of death
in those communities.
But the point is, they live
until they die, and meet an unfortunate event
of some kind,
they live with vigor.
Unlike us.
I mean, how many people spend
more time than necessary on the couch,
just because they don't have the energy
to go anywhere else, now?
Yeah.
It's really sad, what's happened here,
because the degenerative, you know,
degenerating from the inside out,
and people get to a certain age
where those degenerative things
manifest themselves to such a degree
that they're just completely incapacitated.
Their life experience is not
an enjoyable life experience.
They're not fully functioning.
They're not expressing themselves
in a sense of contribution.
In fact, they become, like, a negative vortex
where it takes so much, carries so much energy,
to keep them alive.
And they go through a period of time
where they spend all of their resources
and everything just staying alive.
It's very sad, and we see it all the time.
And we see it around us, I think, every family.
Most of us, people watching right now,
know people that are in exactly this situation,
if not themselves.
Yeah.
The point is,
there's a choice.
And the Amazon offers a lot of this--
again, I keep going back to life force,
just looking at the plants.
Actually, I've known of your company
for many years, and have used
various of the products off and on
through the years, and always found
this kind of life force boost
whenever I would consume them.
So, what's going on in these medicinal plants
that we're not finding, say,
on the grocery store shelves,
in our multivitamins and Geritol?
Well, it's really easy.
You think that there's 3,000 edible
fruits in the Amazon.
What you find on your store shelves,
you may have got, what, 40 or 50?
You look at people's daily diet.
They consume, in the course of a year,
they may have 30 items that they're consuming.
And that's all they consume.
You know, 30 different plants or animals
and that's it.
So there's no biodiversity.
It's not even available.
So, in the rainforest, of course, there is.
So, what's going on?
What's going on, some things we understand,
some things we don't understand.
Some things we're beginning to discover.
But the concept is really quite simple.
You've got a more concentrated and wild plants,
obviously, you go into the forest,
you find a wild tree,
it is the strongest of the species by definition
of the fact that it's alive.
It's living there.
It's survived all the ecological challenge.
So it's got a more dense source of chemistry,
of nutrition, and information.
And the information aspect is really important.
So, our bodies are essentially
a very complex series of organs.
Spleen, thymus, lungs, liver.
And so, there's an innate intelligence
that orchestrates all of this
to work together.
You know, we don't have to think
about our pancreas.
We don't have to think about our thymus.
We don't have to think about, you know,
these organs doing their job.
They do it automatically.
We don't have to know that we have these organs, right?
People still live.
They're going on this innate intelligence
and orchestrating all of it.
So, what happens is,
when we take in air, food, sunshine, water,
so just think about the food.
The nutrition and the chemistry that we take in.
The body knows what to do with it, right?
And the problem is, that we're talking about,
the commercial food supply
is so deficient in the things
that would really create a strong vitality,
there's enough life force, barely,
in the food supply, to keep people alive.
True.
And they think of health as,
"Okay, I'm alive, I can get up,
"I can go to work today, I can come back."
But what I'm talking about
is a whole new level of life experience.
This is an opportunity we have.
For the first time, I believe,
in the history of our species,
where we have access to the big garden,
the rain forest, with all these species of plants
that can come forward.
And so then, when you're eating these,
your spleen and thymus,
these materials come through the bloodstream,
and they say, "wow, where's that been my whole life?
"Look what I can do now."
And so you get your heart, spleen,
lungs, thymus, liver, kidneys,
all these organs start rallying to a new place of vitality
that expresses itself, and manifests itself,
and you know it.
This is a new level of life experience
that we have an opportunity for now.
Well, and it's interesting, because, we...
in the give and take of everything,
we don't have to worry about,
for the most part.
Most of the people watching this
are at their computer, obviously.
They're all at their computers right now watching this.
And sitting, probably, in an apartment,
or in a house somewhere in the world,
in an area that's been developed enough
to be able to have access to the computer,
so we don't have to worry about snake bites.
And malaria, and the things that
indigenous people do fall prey to,
are not our concern.
If we can have an absence of those,
and a presence of that incredible
nutrient load from the Amazon,
then what is possible?
Well, this is the great thing.
This is the great experiment, you know,
that we're just beginning right now.
So, with the advent of the computer,
and the internet, and information,
we live in an age of exploding
information and technology
that makes the information available to the masses,
so it's changed very, very quickly.
And, just think, just a short hundred years ago,
if you wanted to go to the Amazon,
without an airplane, that's a long, long wait.
Several months in a boat, and that sort of thing.
So, just in that short time span,
not only do we know about these things,
but now they're instantly available.
So, where can we go?
I don't know.
I don't know how long we can live.
I don't know how good we can feel.
But I'm in for the full ride here.
(Regina laughs)
I know that I'm feeling
better than I felt in my life.
And, obviously, in my early twenties,
I was having a near-death experience,
and all that's changed,
all that's turned around.
The body organs rebuild themselves.
Some organs rebuild themselves
in a matter of weeks, others in a matter of months.
Cells die.
New cells are replacing those.
So, depending on what nutrient matter
those new cells have, you know,
what chemistry, nutrition, and information
those new cells have,
what resonance they come in at,
they're rebuilding our whole bodies
over a period of a year, 18 months,
you've got an entirely new body,
and new cells that weren't there 18 months ago.
So, it's never too late to begin.
And let's talk about that whole notion
of bioinformation.
And, we know now that the cells communicate,
are fully sustaining in and of themselves,
and they communicate with each other
through very sophisticated mechanisms.
What happens when you put
this incredibly rich bioinformation into the mix?
Well, I think you get an energetic shift
that allows the transport, the receiving
and the transmitting of that information
to go in a very uninterrupted way.
Maybe it's something over the synaptic clefts.
I don't know, but that energy really shifts.
Because plants, like humans, will store
the memories of their whole life growing up.
Obviously, in a rain forest, you've got plants
that are coming up with a history
of biological balance.
Balance and harmony their whole life.
And the whole biodiversity in their surroundings.
And then you've got information
from plants that are commercially grown,
that simply don't have any biodiversity.
They're all like little orphans.
They're all, yeah. (laughs)
There's nobody
to raise them or teach them anything.
Yeah, exactly.
That's exactly right.
So, we've got corn coming up
that looks around its whole life,
and it's surrounded by nothing but corn.
It's grown in soil, so it doesn't have the minerals,
so it's essentially starved.
And growing beside an interstate highway,
so it's breathing in exhaust fumes.
So, these are not necessarily happy plants.
So that energy that we eat,
and let's face it, eating is a very intimate activity.
We're taking everything about this plant,
you know, the source, the history,
chemistry, information, everything about that,
and ingesting it into our body.
We're learning now, like you're pointing out,
that it's not just about that chemistry
that's in there and it interfaces.
The energetics, the information,
the bioinformation we refer to.
All that's going in.
And we find people eating
the plants from the rainforest.
That information resides.
Either at a subtle level,
or it manifests itself more overtly,
depending on their state of consciousness
and how that information could be utilized.
Let's talk about consciousness,
because consciousness is a part
of every living thing.
And I think that often people think that--
well, the only plant most people
watching this interview have heard of,
or many people watching this interview
have heard of, is ayahuasca.
A lot of people take trips
down to the Amazon
in order to be able to expose themselves
to the mind and consciousness-altering
experience of ayahuasca,
but ayahuasca isn't the only
consciousness-altering plant.
You're talking about many subtle realms
of shifting of consciousness
within these plants that you're speaking of
that are known as medicinals.
Can you talk about that for a little bit?
Sure I can.
And maybe I'll start with the ayahuasca,
since you brought the ayahuasca up,
and ayahuasca is a very strong
and a very important medicine.
Obviously, the Ayahuasceros, the Curanderos.
It's widely used all over the Amazon Basin.
Ayahuasca is a vine, called a
Banisteriopsis Caapi,
and, when they prepare the ayahuasca,
it's prepared in a space of reverence
because they consider the ayahuasca
like the mother of the entire plant kingdom.
So that's why it's so important.
And they thought it was important for me,
they, some of the Curanderos and the Chamanes,
to experience this because it opens up
the communication with the plants.
And so, it's very strong medicine.
It's not recreational.
And it's done under the guidance
of an Ayahuascero, so they're singing
the Icaros, or the ayahuasca songs,
where they're calling in, like,
the boa, and the plants' energies
and spirits to come in.
So when you do it,
it tends to, obviously, you get sick.
I mean, you're throwing up.
It's very cleansing.
You're purging, and you're sweating,
and your heart's racing, and your heart's beating.
And then you get, the hallucinations come on.
It's very psychoactive.
And, normally, it will bring up
whatever your worst fear is,
and it will manifest it in some form.
So, now you've got to deal with that
during this whole experience.
But, at the same time,
I think it unzips a file,
unzips various files in our brain,
that we don't normally have access to.
And these are files that, for example,
when we were born, or before we were born,
when the sperm and the egg come together,
and form a zygote, and that begins to expand.
Normally, I suppose a normal understanding
would be that we learn everything we know
in this lifetime.
But, obviously, the information of our parents
are in that sperm and in that egg.
It determines the color of our hair,
the color of our eyes, how tall we are.
All that information's there.
So the information of their life experience
is also there, but we don't normally
have access to that.
And, likewise, the grandparents,
and the great-grandparents.
This goes all the way back.
So, I think with ayahuasca, it kind of
unzips that file and gives you the experience
and information of your entire genealogy.
So, look at the entire genealogy of everybody.
That goes back to the source.
And so, that's the information
you've got access to,
almost in a very spiral-coded form,
during this whole experience.
So, it's very strong medicine.
Very strong medicine.
You spend a lot of time talking about it.
But it does, in the end, I think,
open up a channel of knowingness
and communication with the plants,
with the living plants.
So it's very important.
And every plant has the information in it.
So when we eat different plants,
we're getting a whole variety of information.
And I've heard some of the people
that take a lot of the Amazonian herbs
say that there is a process of
kind of awakening in consciousness
and clarity that begins happening
just taking these nutrients as well.
So, and these are more subtle levels
of opening of consciousness, I would assume.
Oh sure, yeah, it is.
It's very rich in bioinformation.
So, you do it on a longer-term basis,
you really begin to recognize that
you may be more centered, more balanced.
Perhaps things that used to bother you
really, you're able to ascertain that
that's not really important stuff anymore.
So, really, it gives you a level of understanding
of the life experience, even at a level
that may not be totally a conscious level, that's there.
True, that makes sense.
Because in the Quantum view,
you're absorbing balance and harmony into your body,
via the experience of the plants
in this environment that is balanced,
that has found its own balance.
Yeah, and it starts with energy.
So that energy, that energetic understanding,
if it's not there,
which, say, it would not be there
in the commercial food supply.
Or be there at an almost undetectable level
in a commercial food supply.
So if the energetic level is not there,
and the information is not there,
then you're already down to
almost a very thin membrane
separating those organs and that understanding
from a degenerative state.
So, then, once things begin to degenerate,
on a physical level,
you can go way beyond,
you can build in giant buffers
by moving the energy much, much higher.
If the energy level,
energetic and bioinformation, is not there,
then it gets closer and closer
to actually degenerative state
that is just visible and expressive.
Let's talk about some of the plants.
Let's talk about the life force
of some of your favorites.
One story I like is the camu camu
and what it offers humanity.
Can you talk a little bit about that plant?
Yeah, I can.
The camu is a fascinating plant
for a variety of reasons,
and one that surprised me on many levels,
because the understanding is, of course,
that camu bears a fruit,
about the size of a large cherry,
that has the highest concentration
of naturally-occurring Vitamin C.
More than anything in the world.
So, that's really nice,
since most of the population
is deficient in Vitamin C.
But, at the same time,
it wasn't that exciting to me.
Because we're dealing with other plants
with oxindole alkaloids
and things that really make a significant difference
for very strong, powerful degenerative issues
that people are dealing with.
And it takes a long time
for these plants to produce fruit.
So, these plants have a very interesting history, the camu.
In that, they grow in the Amazon flood plain,
so that, when they're young,
they're completely underwater
during the rainy season.
The rains come, water levels rise, like, 40 feet.
And so, these plants spend three months
of their life completely submerged.
Totally underwater.
Like, growing inside the Amazon River.
And then, what that does is,
the high water picks up all the biomass,
all of the plants that have dropped down,
the leaves, stems, barks, everything.
The compost.
It picks up all that biomass and moves it around
during the high water.
And then, when the waters recede,
of course, that settles down,
and you go in, you dig out the camu plants,
and stand them up.
And so, these camu camu plants
are living off the richest biomass on the planet.
100,000 species of biodiversity in the Amazon.
When high water comes, it just moves it around,
drops it right on these camu plants.
And they live off that.
And, they're so special because
they can live underwater for three months.
How do they do that?
And so, they keep growing and keep growing.
It takes about seven years
to really begin to bear fruit.
Year eight, you start getting a lot of fruit.
And when we first got this fruit,
and we dried it,
and I just licked the powder,
in about two minutes I realized
it just cleared my mind,
it brightened the day.
Something else was happening here.
Made the world a better place.
I said, "this is not about Vitamin C.
"Something else is going on with this."
Yeah, it's the richest source
of naturally-occurring Vitamin C
of anything in the world,
but now I know it's got leucine,
valine, serine, some very important amino acids,
that, when they're absent in the diet,
it can result in depression and moodiness
and things like that.
It's got a fully array of B vitamins.
Thiamin, niacin, riboflavin.
So, not only the Vitamin C is there,
which is great for the immune system.
It's very important for the health of the skin,
the hair, the fingernails.
It's wonderful for cardiovascular support.
The biggest killer in America.
And so, the list goes on and on.
It's anti-inflammatory.
What Vitamin C is about,
and Linus Pauling did extraordinary work
with the importance of Vitamin C.
But now, we see another whole profile
of bioflavinoids, and amino acids,
and other vitamins and things in there,
that really express themselves
and create a biological terrain
that helps the uptake of serotonin in the brain.
So now, we're really just--
That's important.
Adjusting the mood and the perception
of the world by people too.
So, this fruit has become really,
an astounding, surprising, wonderful,
important gift from the Amazon right now.
And you found a way to
make it available so that
it really doesn't degenerate,
it doesn't oxidize or anything.
One thing I was curious about,
not just that, but, I mean, you have
so many rich products like this.
This is just one.
I just like the story of the plant
and how it survives, really.
And then the benefits of it.
But, what about bringing them
back into the country?
When so many of the foods and supplements
that are brought into this country
are irradiated,
how do you get around all of this?
Or do you get around--
I assume you do.
Yeah, what we do, we insist on
a hand inspection of the herbs
and the raw material that we bring up,
so they're not irradiated
and that sort of thing.
And, so, if you've got a boatload of bananas,
or food crops that come up,
and you're insisting on a hand inspection,
they can put it in a warehouse
and say, "yeah, we'll get to it
"in another three or four weeks."
Five weeks or six weeks, if they're really busy.
Well, if you got a boatload of bananas,
you're not going to want to do that, right?
Six weeks, you're going to have
a boatload of mush.
So that's why the food crops,
they just, they don't care.
So that's why the food coming into the country
is irradiated, because it's got to pass,
they've got to get it in.
For us, it's okay.
It's just an inconvenience if they say,
"okay, it's going to be five or six weeks."
That's okay for us.
We'll wait the five or six weeks
and have the hand inspection done,
so we can bring it in that way.
And with the camu, we seal it up,
so it's important because that will begin to,
with the Vitamin C content, anyway,
will begin to oxidize over time.
So we take that material, we dry it,
we have a warm air dryer,
where we dry that fruit down,
and then we grind it into powder,
and then it's sealed into
like, five kilo bags there.
So, it's triple-airtight sealed,
and then we bring those up,
and then we put those into
one-gram airtight packets we call "fresh packs."
So then, the fresh pack, it stays just like that,
until it's time to open it and reintroduce it
into its medium, which is water,
reintroduced into water and
shaken up into a beverage.
And can you talk about
the qualitative difference of having
this form of Vitamin C in the body?
Well, you already hit on it
by looking at all the other nutrients
that are present, compared to, say, ascorbic acid.
White powder.
That's it.
I mean, it's a totally different animal, you know?
When you've got ascorbic acid,
which is a synthetic Vitamin C,
as opposed to a natural Vitamin C,
that's surrounded by its naturally-occurring elements,
the other bioflavinoid profiles,
and the amino acids, and everything else,
that really make it friendly to the body,
absorbable by the body, usable by the body,
so you can express itself.
That was the same thing as
something that's real, and something
that's synthetic and isolated.
And isolated, and that's a really big point.
And that's often what happens
in the allopathic medical model.
Everything is isolated.
And, in fact, a lot of the drugs that people take,
pharmaceutical drugs that people take,
are based on mimicking, or sourced,
out of the Amazon, anyway, right?
Yeah.
The original pattern for it.
Yeah, you're exactly right, yeah.
And it's estimated up to 25 to 30% are like that,
where the original pattern, the original footprint,
came from a plant,
and then the model, or the drug model--
it's a drug business, so their model
is to isolate the specific active component of that,
so they can patent that,
and then you've got a synthetic isolate
that's being sold,
which is very, very different
than the mother plant.
And we see that happen very often now,
where you've got a plant.
For example, Sangre de Drago, for example.
You know, the sap I talked about earlier.
In addition to healing wounds,
we find that, if you dry that sap,
it's 90% pure proanthocyanidins.
So, it's like, almost a pure antioxidant.
It's also got very strong antiviral activity.
There's a lot of research done
by Shaman Pharmaceuticals on this plant.
I think the world should be very thankful
for Shaman Pharmaceutical, for investing,
I think it's close to 70 million dollars, researching this,
because they should--
the idea was to make a herpes drug out of it.
You know, a virus, because,
very potently antiviral, and they saw what it did
to the herpes virus, and other rare forms
of lung virus, and on and on and on.
So, they spent a lot of money.
The problem was,
that when they isolated the particular component
that they thought was responsible
for that activity,
as it went into second-phase clinical trials, and so on,
it became more and more toxic.
So, eventually, they just had to abandon it.
But they showed great efficacy
of what the sap does.
But they're not in the sap business.
The drug companies are in the drug business,
so if they can't isolate it,
or it's not effective in that isolate form,
then they scrap it as a business project.
But they did great work
on showing the efficacy of the plants.
So, you're in the sap business.
Exactly.
(both laughing)
Great, you get the whole enchilada, there.
I think it's great.
I love the sap.
Now, the difference in my business is,
is that we can't say, "this cures herpes."
Or, "this is really good for a virus."
You know, we talk about it
for its antioxidant activity,
and for its ability to regenerate
and help one express their life experience
as a more vital level,
which is exactly what it does.
Right.
Let's expand the picture.
And this is also part of
your five undeniable truths,
but I wanted to expand it,
because you just mentioned
the word "isolation" a few times.
This whole subject of isolation
permeates our cultures in the Western world,
as people isolate themselves from each other.
You know, a condo for every person, so to speak.
And the same thing, by isolating nutrients
out of our plants, by growing crops
that are isolated only in the presence of each other.
What do you see, in terms of
your role and your part?
What's your vision for
essentially, overcoming this isolation
of a plant, of a species, of many species?
Well, on a larger scale,
you're talking about the isolation.
People are becoming isolated.
Becoming isolated into the countries,
become isolated with languages,
become isolated in many different ways.
And the Amazon rain forest,
which is the largest concentration
of life energy on Earth,
with this huge gift of biodiversity,
that I think everyone should
have access to this,
everybody in our species.
And the value of the Amazon rain forest,
now, for the most part, is being determined
by its other natural resources there.
You know, the oil in the Amazon rain forest,
the minerals in the rain forest,
the lumber in the rain forest.
It's so rich in so many resources,
that that's the cause of its deforestation,
people going after that.
The biggest deforester now is soybeans.
So what I see my vision is,
what I'm very optimistic about,
is people are beginning to recognize,
a.) that our species are dying
of degenerative disease,
which I think is entirely unnecessary,
it just simply doesn't have to be,
because of what we know now,
from the plants that are in the Amazon.
So, it redirects a different value,
a stature, to a living Amazon rain forest,
when we recognize the value of what's there
from the standpoint of the chemistry,
the nutrition, the information,
they can change our life experience.
They can change the course
of degenerative disease.
Now, as that value is recreated,
what we're doing, specifically,
is helping indigenous communities get rights
and titles and deeds to land there.
So, normally, where the titles and deeds start,
the deforestation ends.
Because they will protect their land.
And you're a big part of this right now.
Well, we're doing everything we can,
and we've got a great model that's working,
and I would like to see other people
using the same specific model,
but we're at the front end
of something that is expanding
that people do understand.
And I really believe this is
a big part of the future.
So, as these indigenous communities are re-empowered,
this is a whole different understanding.
The analogy I would use would be,
like, the Mid East.
Say, the Mid East 50, 60, 70 years ago.
The United Arab Emirates,
and Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran.
The oil producing nations of the world.
Well, as oil became, there's a bigger and bigger
demand for oil, you know,
suddenly, these countries--
there's a reassessment of value
to these countries.
A reassessment of resources flowing to these countries.
So, after the Arab oil embargo in the 70s,
suddenly, these countries
had a lot more stature in the world,
a lot more presence in the world,
because of the resources there
the rest of the world was hungry for.
And we see that continuing to go now.
The price of oil is 60, 70 dollars.
Seller's market.
Now we're seeing, I think,
a rebirth of that in the Amazon.
And I say rebirth because
almost no one recognizes it
the way I'm explaining it now,
but a reassignment of value.
Because, what's more important,
putting gasoline in your tank,
or, if you really realize, that,
"gee, I don't have to suffer from
"all these degenerative diseases?"
That becomes much more important.
And so, as that consciousness shifts,
and the understanding, and the information,
and the realization shifts,
then there's a much greater value
for that living rain forest,
and the empowerment
is going to the indigenous communities.
So the indigenous communities there,
I'm already seeing,
when I'm working with chiefs and Curanderos,
they're asking me, and this is recent,
to connect with other chiefs and Curanderos
from other native peoples.
For example, the native peoples in the U.S.
There is that communication
that's beginning to spread.
We're able to put into these communities,
for example, solar powered shortwave radios,
so they're able to communicate
between the communities
with a shortwave radio that's run by solar power,
and communicate with our base
in Yarinacocha the same way.
And so, once you've got
that communication going on,
with laptops and things,
you get solar panels in a laptop,
and you can tie into the world's database
and still be living
hundreds of miles deep in the Amazon rain forest.
So, if you've got the information there,
plus, you've got the autonomy
of still living in a natural environment.
I mean, how are you helping them protect this?
How do you assist them in
gaining the deeds to their property?
Well, you know, it's a process that started
probably seven, eight years ago,
when a particular community
that we had a really good relationship with
came to us, and the chief came and said,
"there's lumber companies on our land here.
"And they're cutting the trees down.
"Can you help us?"
And we said, "yeah, we will help you."
So I said, "let's just drive them off.
I said, "so, how big is your land?"
And then it became clear
that they really didn't have any land.
They've just been living there forever.
And what they called their land,
there wasn't a title or a deed or anything to it.
So, we go to the Peruvian government
and say we'd like to get these some titles
and deeds to this land,
and they say, "what land?"
There's no map.
So the first thing that you have to do
is survey it.
So, you get a surveying crew to survey it,
and then you've got a definition
on what it is.
And that's the beginning of the process.
We get surveyors, engineers, and attorneys.
So you go through this process
where you get the rights to the land
to be living there.
And ultimately, you get an actual
finished title and deed in the name of the community.
So, it was kind of a pioneering experience
to go through that process.
But, when it was done,
it changes the world.
It changes the future.
There's 200 people in this community,
and now they've got 13,000 acres of land.
It changes everything.
That's fabulous.
And so then that created a model
that we're replicating.
That, in and of itself,
was absolutely incredible.
So, as we wrap this up,
what kind of vision--
I mean, you've got your,
you're connecting the public at large now,
not just doctor's offices, but the public at large,
with these herbs, so they can start
making decisions and taking this
kind of responsibility for their health
into their own hands.
You're helping the tribes protect their land,
so that they have future revenues
for future generations.
Can we assume that the knowledge
of the elders in medicine men
is being passed on
to the younger generation still?
Is that happening?
In some cases, that is happening.
In other cases, it isn't.
It's being lost.
As there's kind of an integration
of these communities,
as the cities kind of spread,
the kids growing up in some of these communities,
like kids anywhere, they grow up.
They become teenagers, and they get restless,
and so they're looking to go somewhere.
And, as you know, there's another
town, or place to go.
They're kind of bailing out.
The interesting thing that we see
is that when we're in that community
and we're showing value
to the knowledge of the plants,
then that's something totally different.
So, now the teenagers, the other people,
the young people in the community,
recognize that someone from the outside
recognizes value in this,
so that instills a different valuation
in their mind for it.
So, we're seeing a rekindling
of the interest there,
in many cases.
But in other cases,
when a medicine man dies,
a lot of information is lost.
And what's your part in continuing this?
Well, obviously, we're trying to,
like sponges, suck up all the information we can
from these Curanderos and Chaman,
and anyone who has information
about these plants and what their benefits are,
and then we're re-sharing it with the community.
Obviously, we're creating products
and kind of an interesting story,
because we've got, for example,
there's plants that grow in one area of Peru
that are traditionally used for liver and kidney health,
and there are plants that are growing in Brazil
that are used for liver and kidney health,
that don't grow, that aren't indigenous to this area.
So, if we take those plants from Brazil
and the plants from Peru, thousands of miles away,
and combine them,
sometimes that's a better formula,
sometimes it's not.
We've got some very sophisticated technology
we use to determine that.
But once we have that done,
and we refine that, and process it,
and concentrate it, and do our
special techniques with it,
and have it in a usable, convenient form,
and I'm carrying that in my suitcase
back upriver, and I'm eating that.
In the beginning, I didn't recognize it,
because they have wild plants growing there.
They would respond to the convenience of this
that has in it the other plants
from other parts of the rain forest,
but they do.
And so now, we find ourselves taking back,
not only taking the information that they know,
but taking the information
that we've discovered from the other
areas of the rain forest, too,
and the technology that we have
to create these specific formulas,
and kind of upgrading all that, if you will,
and taking it back, that they really
respond to that material.
That they're really excited about having that.
So, that's part of it.
That's doing your part.
And you've been there over 300 times,
and I certainly hope you're going to be there
another 300 times or more,
as you continue your discoveries.
Any final thoughts before you sign off?
Because I know we're just about
at our hour right now.
Well, you know, the role,
asking about the role that we do,
one of the roles, and the way we envision that
is, really, supporting them
in however they would like to be supported.
Instead of carrying our vision of what we think
that would be good for them,
whatever that is, it's really about
empowering them and whatever
they would like to do.
And it's not always necessarily a thing
that we think that it might be.
But they're human beings.
They make up their own mind.
And our role is to empower them
with the future that they envision of themselves.
And our bigger role, we believe,
in doing that, and then helping bring
and manifest these important botanicals
for the individual and planetary health,
it's really just about making the world a better place.
Well, thank you, personally,
and for all of us.
For putting decades of your time and energy
and passion into this.
Thank you.
And thank you for your time.
Pleasure.
There's no question in my mind
that consuming foods and supplements
with these levels of life force and supernutrients
are going to be absolutely necessary
for the health of our species
in the times ahead.
To find our more about Amazon Herbs mission,
and their products,
please go to the Conscious Market tab on this site.
We're choosing to be a part
of this circle of benefit,
or sustainable economic model.
We hope you see the value in it, too.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(lively music)